---
title: Distributed vs centralized logic in embedded systems
---

This is a "shades of grey" kind of choice.
It is based on the observation that there are two kinds of code in the system, control logic (switching outputs, reading inputs, controlling motors) and automation logic (making decisions based on sensor states and settings).

You can tell that the system uses distributed logic because the interface is in terms of machine functions (eg "place this box here"), not control functions ("move this actuator 10 degrees" or "read this sensor value").

My fundamental take away here is that you want to keep the interfaces as simple as possible - exactly where and how that line gets drawn will probably depend on the application.

### Distributed logic

The control logic and automation logic is in the nodes.
The primary goal here is to have as simple an interface to the nodes as possible.
A side effect is that the automation logic is often written large in the networking protocol, because the automation state machine edge transitions normally involve sending a message.
Ideally, each MCU will control one system function, although it is possible to have multiple separate machine functions on one MCU.
A typical setup:

- Tasks run on different boards, each controlling a machine function (eg weighing out a hopper worth of fruit, or moving a belt to the next position).
- Another board (or PC) coordinates the overall machine state ("stop all!"), and accepts messages from each other board and sends them messages.

A key downside to this approach is that automation logic changes can involve touching code on multiple devices. However, the logic for a particular module is relatively easy to change, being tidily encapsulated. The protocol design also forces clean interfaces, but the protocol itself requires much thought.
Testing each module is also relatively easy, and implementing real time behaviour within the bounds of a single module is trivial.

Information tends to stay within the nodes. A good information extraction system is necessary; this forces separation from the UI, which is both a good thing (no temptation to take shortcuts) and a bad thing (often forces some duplication, getting an overview of the system can be tricky).

Often a little bit of accidental complexity leaks into the design, because of real world convenience. For example, if there is both a physical button and a button on the user interface that perform the same task, the control code must keep them coordinated. Another example is if a existing board design is lacking in a feature but another board in the system has it, it may be expedient to send detailed control messages between the two nodes instead of keeping the functionality matched with the boards.

### Centralized logic

Easier to develop and debug - most code goes in one place, probably on a PC.
IO can normally be on any node, so convenient for electrical.
Nodes designs maybe can be more standardized and shareable, so potentially benefiting from volume production.
Tends to run into problems when real time behaviour is required; this can lead to complicated node interfaces that mix the two patterns.
Can turn into a mess of code, because all of the node details are exposed to the control code (lack of good encapsulation requires extra design discipline).
In theory, the node code is simpler because it only has to deal with hardware details, but this is only true if the interface is kept as simple as possible.

