---
title: Embedded RTOS
---

A RTOS is better than no RTOS.

FreeRTOS works relatively well.

Crossworks Tasking Library (CTL) has a really nice API. In general, we just used:

- events (32 bit uint consisting of event bits; generally more than enough)
- memory pools (custom implementation, but basically the same)
- queues (that set an event bit when they had data)

This lead to a really nice pattern where each task had an event loop that waited on a message queue, and then dealt with that message. This eliminated races, but you could get deadlocks instead if the messaging between systems was ill defined. Also, the messages needed to be carefully free'd, and there wasn't compiler support for that. Another problem was that the queue space and message buffers were finite, and serializing to/from a message buffer is somewhat heavyweight for simple calls, so that is worth considering.
Some simple support functions that return data are just easier to implement with a mutex.

CTL's memory pools stored allocation data inline; this meant that corruption was hard to spot and deal with. If using a memory pool, consider what happens if you write over the end.

FreeRTOS has a dedicated "timer" task for irregular events, which is pretty handy, although it uses callbacks...
Thread safety in FreeRTOS is very much the traditional locking approach; event loops are better, use them whenever possible.

The style where each task has a unique priority is easier to debug than the common pattern in FreeRTOS, since the task behaviours are more deterministic.

