---
title: Node identification schemes
date: 2025-06-13
---

In a machine with several identical nodes, some way of identifying where they are physically on the machine is required.

Some potential considerations:

- Is this easy for the factory to work out, and how much time will it take them to set up (cost!)?
- How will people debug when things are wrong (eg nodes with the same ID, nodes in the “wrong” place)?
- On a modular machine, what happens if the modules are installed a different way around?
- What happens if the networks on two machines are linked together, either accidentally or intentionally?

Each board must have a unique ID. This can be achieved using a combination of inputs. Some examples:

- An I2C EEPROM with a MAC included (something like a 24AA02E48T). A PCB specific board ID/rev/build + an optional expansion ID was set electrically on the PCB. Finally, 1 or 2 rotary DIP switches were used (either a single 16 position DIP switch or a pair of 10 position DIP switches, depending on the age of the board). DIP switch and board ID was read via shift registers on startup. Boards have a serial number on a sticker but not readable electrically.
- An EEPROM with the serial number, board type and revision/build numbers set via serial CLI interface during manufacturing.

The software must then be able to map from the board ID to a location in the machine. There are two main approaches here: the software is configured and knows what to expect, or the software attempts to detect the machine setup automatically. When detecting automatically some thought needs to be put into what happens if a node (or several nodes) is disconnected and so doesn’t self-identify, and what to do if part of the machine is connected and disconnected dynamically.

The board test system should verify any hardware board IDs in the factory to prevent a board identifying itself wrongly if it is damaged.

The PCB type, revision, build revision is likely used when bootloading. If there may be two of the same PCBs running different code, it is worth considering how that will be dealt with.

See also [embeddedartistry.com](https://embeddedartistry.com/fieldatlas/versioning-pcbs/).

## Possible mapping schemes

### Board types and DIP switches

Most machines had specially designed boards for the different parts of the machine. As a consequence most boards could be identified purely by the board type. Where there were multiple identical boards in the machine they tended to be doing the same thing (eg separate PCBs for reading from weighing cells 1-16) and so it was natural to identify them using the board type and DIP switch.

As a convention, when there was a single board in the machine it had the DIP switch set to 0. When there were >1 boards, they had DIP’d numbers from 1 upwards. This was done so that it was easy to identify if someone forgot to set the DIP switch.

One downside of this approach is that it degrades into “DIP switches for everything” if the same board is used in multiple different applications.

For “sealed” PCBs a sticker was put on the outside of the case to show which number the board was set as. However it could still be quite difficult to check in a machine, depending on how easy the board was to access. When upgrading a machine (adding modules) some extra shuffling around was sometimes required because the ID couldn’t be easily changed in place.

It was relatively quick to set the DIP switch during assembly, and letting single boards have the DIP switch unset simplified production. I haven’t really heard of any problems in the field due to the modules being around the wrong way, but I suspect it happened occasionally and led to wasted time switching modules around – possibly not a big deal if that was straightforward?

### DIP switches for everything

This was tried on different projects. In these cases the boards are all (or mostly) the same and need a unique DIP switch value.

Some kind of convention was required for identifying which boards were where. One approach was to have a documented convention, which was workable when there was only a single machine configuration, or a relatively small number of options. The other approach was to let the technician setting up the system make something up. This didn’t work so well as each technician had to figure out how the particular setup had been done – we didn’t have a centralized place to store that information (for that system, none of the nodes was “master”). In that case I think it would have been better to program a human readable name into each board since there was generally an existing naming scheme that could have been used.

The addressing scheme might be a bit awkward and difficult to keep extensible, due to the small address space in the DIP switches.

For this to work, it is crucial that it is easy to access the boards and check the DIP switch values to verify that they are as expected. In general this is a “high human effort” approach.

### Topology search

This is an interesting scheme. The boards self identify based on information set in the factory, and then the topology search is used to map out how the boards are wired together. This is then cross-checked against a machine configuration in the UI.

I guess here it is largely automatic, and failures will be due to bad wiring or because the machine is configured wrong. Keeping the number of possible configurations in the UI manageable seems like the main challenge. This seems like it would work especially well for very modular machines.

One downside is that this needs special support in the wiring – most (all?) standard fieldbuses don’t have this concept. The implementation also needs a fair bit of information programmed in at the factory, which might be economical but I am unsure how it weighs against putting the information into the board design for smaller quantities.

### Serial numbers

Most board have some kind of unique ID, probably a serial number but something else like a MAC would also work. The technician setting up the machine can then map from the unique ID to a physical place in the machine in the UI. This is more or less like DIP switches, but trading off having to set the DIP switches for a much longer ID. Similar limitations apply like needing to be able to find the serial number easily. It does mean that duplicate IDs are no longer possible barring some mixup at the factory.

### Programmed ID

This is sort of like DIP switches for everything but with a free-form string that is programmed in by attaching a laptop to the board.

This only makes sense for a very freeform system where there is an existing naming convention to use, or where the setup is very modular and things may be moved around frequently.

### Special plugs

The idea here is to have a part of the wiring loom that plugs into a socket on the board and encodes where in the machine the board is. This obviously has physical costs and debugging a bad wiring loom might be extra painful. The benefit is that it is extremely low tech, and will allow nodes to discover where they are in a machine.

