---
title: Bootloading strategies
---

Firmware should be updateable and survive a power cut while an update is happening.

It is also nice if the board is recoverable if bad software is ever released. This might be software that crashes on startup, or software that can't bootload a replacement.

My suggestion here is to "keep it simple, stupid", and aim to avoid bricking boards.
This implies having a good testing setup that will avoid putting broken code into the wild.

All strategies need a solid bootloading protocol, since it is very difficult to break backwards compatibility.

It is much easier to deploy individual firmware binaries to individual boards, this will help if multiple different MCUs are used. For speed purposes it is tempting to consider a bulk update protocol with a broadcast mechanism. Resist that temptation unless it is really a requirement! The complexity gain and flexibility loss is substantial.

Ideally keep a copy of the code being replaced until the update is confirmed to be OK.

[The Interrupt blog has a good article on this topic](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/device-firmware-update-cookbook).

### Bootstrap

The bootstrap checks a flag on startup; if it is set, it copies code from one half of the chip flash to the other. The bootstrap itself can never be changed.
An alternative to a copy is using an A/B approach, but that is more fiddly due to relocations. It may work well if the MCU supports dual-bank memory.
It is worth having a way to read the bootstrap version, though maybe better not to since once deployed there is no way to change it!
If supported, the bootstrap flash memory should be read only.

### Bootloader

This is a more complicated approach. The bootloader must be able to communicate and speak at least part of the communication protocol.
There tends to be a bootstrap for the bootloaders, so that the bootloaders can be updated when (inevitably) bugs are found.
The advantage of this approach is that some of the "impossible to change" complexity is isolated in the bootloader, and that flash memory usage is reduced since only the bootloader needs to be duplicated. Also, the resilience to bad software is increased, since the bootloader that runs but can't update the app can be replaced by the app (although bricked boards is still very much a possiblity, for example if the bootloader misconfigures the networking hardware).
The disadvantage is a significant complexity increase.

### Extra features

It is wise to reserve some part of the flash memory for storing settings, unless there is an extra EEPROM on the board.

Another useful feature is a RAM memory area that is retained on board reset, so that logs from the prior boot can be retrieved. It can be validated by checking the reset reason registers.

Any non-trivial bootloader likely should have logging that can be passed through to the application.

### Testing

At a minumum, test:

- Updating to the new code from an older version
- "Updating" from the new code to an older version

It may also be worth testing updating from the software release the boards are manufactured with.

