---
title: Programmer documentation
date: 2025-06-13
---

Some documentation is useful, and some is not. The most interesting documentation is why something was done the way it was done. But there are also other things of interest, like “where to find the various related parts and documentation”, “how to get started building the code”, “how to test the code”, “what are the rules in the codebase (eg style, important interfaces, etc)”. Some of these things can be partly picked up by experimentation and osmosis. Other things are easy to lose in the sands of time.

When writing documentation, consider:

- Who is the document for?
- When and why will someone look at this?
- How will this be kept up to date?
- Is there any other code or documentation that should be linked to assist further exploration?

Documentation ideally is valuable enough that people use it regularly, and so there is an incentive to keep it up to date. Failing that, is it worth documenting? Probably should balance “how hard it is to reverse engineer” (value added) vs “how frequently things change” (maintenance cost).

It is good to have an entry point for each “topic” – whether that be a repository, machine, or team. This should act as a map pointing to all the resources for a topic, like CI jobs, the issue tracker, source code, and other sources of documentation.

Software project documentation (eg a repository or large folder of code) can follow some kind of template:

- What is the project trying to achieve? (consider a single sentence “mission statement” here!)
- Who is the target audience for the project?
- Roughly how does it work?

For software projects, a README is a good option for this information. Other things to include in a README are:

- How to get started on the project? (building, testing, etc)
- Where is further reading?
- How are the folders structured? (consider renaming folders for clarity if this gets complicated!)
- Where is the project entry point? (to allow further inspection from a top-down perspective)
- What are the rules of the project? (eg a style to follow)
- What is the structure being attempted? (clearly marked interfaces are vital!)

Abbreviations should be eliminated. Failing that they should be expanded and explained.

Issues, code reviews and commits form a kind of secondary documentation. Link where possible. There are some stylistic choices here – what kind of information goes in the issue description and what in the commit? The aim should be to make the information easy to discover – either by someone wondering why something was done, or someone looking for related problems.

A picture is worth a thousand words, but they are much harder to update!

Conciseness is valuable. DRY is great, but sometimes a more tailored document reduces context switches and so is easier to read. Link information aggressively – it is the easiest way to make information straightforward to find!

I think a machine overview is valuable (where things are physically in the machine and the rough purpose, and the software perspective of what is connected where and using what technology). This is somewhat difficult without showing someone around a machine. Also potentially valuable is a list of what boards exist, where they are used, and what I/O or special features they have, along with a picture for easier identification in a box. It could also be valuable to track machine or feature lifetimes – particularly when they stop being in service.

Documentation should have a defined contact person who is responsible for maintaining the document. They are tasked with reviewing changes from other people. They should also keep the document up to date, as a last line of defence.

Use a consistent vocabulary. For example, when changing a project name, change it everywhere. Having two names for things makes it significantly harder for new people to find things. For the same reason, stick to a single language where possible.

## Other notes 

It may be valuable to have a list of human readable “requirements” with fixed IDs. For example “the software has a help function that describes the available settings”. These are then pieces of functionality that can be documented and tracked, associated with bugs, etc. This seems mainly useful to ensure alignment on functionality between developers and other roles.

Consider the ways that software can be split up, and try to align documentation to match. For instance, per machine; per feature; per folder.

Consider larger documenting design decisions explicitly instead of through commit messages, ticket notes and comments. This might include choices of language and the supporting libraries, or how the project is structured. See [embeddedartistry.com](https://embeddedartistry.com/blog/2018/04/05/documenting-architectural-decisions-within-our-repositories/) for an example of this; it’s also reminiscent of PEPs and IETF RFCs. As a corollary, the documents likely are more static than perhaps wise for documentation; more of a historical archive rather than living documents?

One idea is writing a dedicated “implementation proposal” to keep the initial project proposal separate from the eventual documentation. I’m a bit on the fence about this idea, but it does mark it as obviously outdated. One thing to note – the initial project documentation should describe both the why as well as the what.

Meeting notes documenting decisions made and why are likely important for “code archeology”, but somewhat difficult to parse or understand if they have been superseded? Maybe there is a better way?

