---
title: Software is not worse
---

Occasionally someone complains that modern software does the same thing as before at the same speed, if not slower. Normally with reference to Electron apps, which are admittedly massive.

In lots of cases the old software still exists, so it's worth asking ourselves why we made the tradeoff. It isn't that programmers are lazy, although some benefits are decidedly developer facing. Most new software is strictly more powerful; we chose it over the old because it does more.

We also do a lot of things with our computers now that were not possible thirty years ago:
- Streamed video was difficult with typical 90s hardware. Editing video was also painful.
- Image editing was also a real challenge. Displaying images took noticeable memory bandwidth.
- Screen resolutions are typically higher now.
- Version control more or less didn't exist.
- Syntax highlighting was taxing on those systems.
- Modern grammer correction is steadily improving, relying on good machine learning models, unlocked by new hardware.
- With the internet, we get updates much faster, often without user intervention.
- Sync between devices is a key feature.
- Autosave is the default now.
- Searching the filesystem actually works (definitely a heavyweight feature!).
- We store and handle much bigger files (images and video in particular).
- Security is important, so sandboxing and other hardening features are necessary.

Developers tend to pick "heavy" technologies because of some real advantages:
- good ecosystem
- cross platform
- abstractions over low level details (eg memory management)
- simple updates

This lets them create software and features that otherwise might not exist. An app that exists but is slow is way better than an app that doesn't exist because the "business case" didn't work out.

In the end, it's up to us to choose what software to use (mostly; your local public transport or banking app is hard to replace). If it's too slow, choose one of the old fashioned versions instead.

For a wider society version of this, see [gwern.net](https://gwern.net/improvement).
