---
title: Embedded system considerations
date: 2025-06-13
---

Some notes on things I've observed from comparing the different places I've worked.

## Startup and protocol considerations

On startup, boards should always broadcast their presence (unless that causes a broadcast storm; worth considering using a delay in that case).
Once started, they should go through a process of:

- bootloading
- "connecting" (can be as lightweight as a single message saying that the board is started now; consider sending until ack'd though)
- getting settings

Application code generally shouldn't run until setting retrieval is complete.
The caveat being that settings can be changed dynamically as well...

Generally boards reset when bootloading. If they are a gateway the reset should be held off until all other boards are ready, so consider implementing such a feature in the protocol (although gateways are to be avoided).

The controller should reset all other boards on the network on startup, to ensure that they have a clean slate.
Boards should also regularly message the controller board, so if the controller board restarts and one other board misses the reset message, the controller can detect that and recover by resetting that board.
This also provides a "heartbeat" mechanism which is useful for checking that a board is still on the network.

It's worth considering what will happen if >1 controller is on the network.
This could mean >1 controller process started on a computer, or two machine networks accidentally joined.
Ideally that would be detected, errors logged, and a graceful fallback attempted...

Machines typically have at least a "started" and a "stopped" state.
Often some other kind of state is required as well, to indicate a "start from scratch" versus resuming from a pause.
See also the OPC standards for machine control, but they are significantly more complicated than most machines really need.

## Dealing with sensor inputs

You will likely need a debouncing layer. But sometimes you want raw access to sensor data, eg if you need some fancier filtering.
If needing to catch short events, use interrupts but disable the interrupt for some time afterwards to avoid keeping the processor too busy. Alternatively use a carefully picked electrical filtering circuit.
On and off debouncing signals are often different!

If you have an inversion layer, provide access to the raw signal as well.
Either report what the software thinks the "logical state" is, or match the state that the sensor shows (eg via the physical light), and do so consistently.

## Physical design considerations

The board enclosure can be the most expensive part in a board assembly!
Consider ways to reduce that, eg using the same footprint and a generic cutout for plugs.
Boards should always have mounting holes!

Avoid using >1 identical plug on the same board. If you need to, consider what will happen when someone inevitably plugs them in the wrong way around.

Providing power to a board on the same cable as data is not a terrible idea, but it should be used sparingly due to current draw limits and additional cost (eg custom cabling or more expensive equipment like POE).

Boards should have plentiful testpoints - they are cheap and can make debugging much easier.

If you have a super complex set of wiring, consider making it part of a PCB instead! This might save everyone time fixing it.

If you make the inputs on a board only NPN, inevitably you will need to connect a PNP sensor, and vica versa. For development it is easier to support either... but it doesn't need to be exposed to software.

## Safety systems

The first step here is to always power things off physically before sticking your hands into the system.
The second line of defence is making sure the off state is actually off.

Service technicians will almost always find a way around your safety feature if it gets in the way of their job. Maybe they aren't the people you are most worried about, but a false sense of safety is worse than none at all! Also, they might forget whatever workaround they put in and then leave the site. To avoid this, consider how to improve visibility into the system.

Try to avoid creating a complex "safety" system - they should be as self contained as possible, hard to defeat, and as simple as possible.
The added complexity of a "flexible" safety system is not normally worth the added trouble and expense.

## Computer choice

All but the simplest machines will need a computer to power the UI, and maybe offer other features like data reporting over the internet.

COM express modules are relatively expensive, but should provide a portable platform that is supported for a relatively long time, with a wider range of suppliers. You still need a custom PCB for them and a case.

Raspberry Pis - somewhat riskier as there is a single source, but relatively cheap and a reasonably long support period.
Need a case, and the IO options on the board is relatively limited, plus it is missing a RTC.
A key issue is that the storage is unreliable, and the board doesn't have any built in. Version 4 also has some odd connector choices. Version 4 does apparently come with eMMC, so maybe the storage situation is better.
For larger volumes, consider adding a "shield" or using the compute module to add flexibility and extra features.

Desktop PCs are easy to get, and easy to set up. If you don't need a small form factor the server boxes are relatively easy to get.
Maintaining a supply chain for these is somewhat tricky - pre-built machines are very expensive, and getting the right amount of parts requires skills that your average purchasing person does not have, since determining compatibility can be difficult.
Being consumer grade means that they may fail in the field, but also that replacing them is fairly trivial.

OS boils down to Windows, Linux distro with scripting, or Yocto/Buildroot.
Windows has the advantage and disadvantage of automatic security updates, however you are marching to the beat of Microsoft's drum, and that is less than ideal for an industrial environment.
Linux distro with some scripting is easy enough to set up, but hard to maintain and isn't very secure.
Yocto/Buildroot needs some skill to set up, and are relatively expensive to maintain. However there are well known methods for maintaining an image-based system and deploying updates.

