---
title: Homeschooling
---

I was homeschooled after the first year of primary school.
This gave me a solid education - kudos to my parents for their hard work, particularly my mother.

Pros:

- Was ~1 year ahead in maths, despite essentially taking a year off due to sickness.
- Good CS background.
- Able to try a range of afterschool activities and sports.
- Basic history, english, languages, geography, woodworking, art, CS, chemistry, music, etc was covered.
- Did well in SATs. Presumably this meant I had the basics down to pat.
- Lots of free time; schoolwork was finished within 4.5h every day. As a result read heavily.
- Avoids interruption when switching cities.

Cons:

- Some equipment heavy or big group things are difficult to organise, eg hands on chemistry, soccer.
- May have unexpected holes in the curriculum, due to not covering something.
- Not aligned with schools, which made higher education somewhat repetitive and required extra work in some areas.

Other:

- Was tailored to my interests. This meant that I never got very far in Spanish, for example, but I wasn't motivated so maybe no surprise?
- Some curriculum choices worked and some didn't. Not everything went well the first time, statistics being a good example.
- The parents have to mark work, otherwise the motivation disappears.
- Worked best with an active community in the area to get afterschool activities going.
- Was originally due to me believing that I was bad at math, which turned out to be false.
- Was not forced to spend time with larger groups of people. It is unclear what effect that had.
- Tend to be two types of homeschooling families - those that believe there children were special (typically with few children) and those with pragmatic or religious reasons (tended to have 8+ children).
- People are often either curious about the experience (in some countries it is illegal!) or judgemental (some schoolteachers seem to take it as a personal offence).

