---
title: Version control systems
---

Personal opinions on VCS systems.

## Git

Used professionally for ~1 years.

Pros:

- Distributed (suitable for offline work).
- The gold standard, so easy onboarding, well documented, and good tooling support. Most things are possible, the only question is how.
- Separate local commits and rebase provides a good workflow, merges are easy-ish.
- Git bisect is very neat.
- No need to run a server, many off the shelf services available (eg Gitlab, Github).
- Good integration with external services.
- Pulling in third party repos is relatively easy.

Cons:

- Large file support is a mess. Although the partial repo support looks promising, it isn’t supported by hosting providers at the time of writing. Git-lfs works, but is awkwardly tacked on to git and has some sharp edges that can mess up the repo.
- Repositories have no inherent structure or cross repo commits (monorepo encouraged as a consequence).
- Submodules are awkward to work with. For the case when you want to have an external repo as a source dependency, they are fine, but for combining two repos together they are not good; maybe subtrees should be used instead?
- Pull requests are not well integrated (maybe more of a github/gitlab workflow issue?).
- Some advanced workflows (eg splitting commits) are awkward with the base tooling.
- Determining if a commit is included in a branch can be difficult. The `git cherry` tool helps with this, but is approximate. Some third-party tooling introduces a change ID concept (jujutsu, gerrit) to support this, it would be nice if that was built in.
- Nonlinear history can be hard to reason about.

## SVN

Used professionally for ~3 years.

Pros:

- Simple (ish).
- Externals are powerful.

Cons:

- Merges are hacked on.
- Externals are too powerful. It is easy to forget that a file is used elsewhere. One workaround is putting them in a dedicated folder named "externals".
- Basic SVN server from Apache (VisualSVN) lacking in folder permissions, good web UI for reviews, etc. Maybe fixed elsewhere?
- Implementation uses x2 disk space to allow some offline features, leading to a "worst of both worlds" situation.
- Local checkout could be damaged beyond repair by cancelling actions half way through.
- Lack of rebase means that feature branches are crucial.

## Perforce + Swarm

Used professionally for ~2 years.

Pros:

- Good web UI integration for reviews.
- Handles large files well, including avoiding duplicates locally.

Cons:

- CLI tooling is a pain to work with.
- Branching is discouraged and commits are immediate; layering commits is then mostly impossible (changesets are not good enough). Not really resolvable using task branches because of a lack of a good rebase system.
- Has two different types of depots. Streams seem to fix several things like “view mapping is tied to a client”, so maybe OK if everything is done in stream repos?
- Upstream/downstream stuff in streams seems a bit constrictive/confusing.
- Streams themselves have a “view” tied to them which isn’t tied to a particular commit; changing it may break builds of earlier changelists, for example. It is possible to make changes to the views in a changelist, so that is handy.

