---
title: Embedded software languages
date: 2025-06-13
---

There is really a single "traditional" choice here - C.

### C

At least one C style in embedded is to have roughly one RTOS task per file, with each file acting as a module, containing static file-global variables and a bunch of static functions.
Can statically allocate most things which is useful as it is deterministic and easy to check at compile time.
This works pretty well but is difficult to test, because it is hard to reset the state and it encourages the module calling other modules. This can be worked around with a more complicated test framework that builds lots of binaries, one for each test case or similar, but generally not fun.

Debugging static code is generally tricky, since that also hides the variables from the debugger...

Header files are generally a bad idea. Modules and namespaces are a much better approach!
Many other misfeatures, ie anything involving the C preprocessor, declare-without-value, ...

Lacks good metaprogramming and generics support.

### C++

C++ makes heavy use of dynamic allocation by default, so that is difficult to avoid.

PIMPL'd C++ gives nice clean interfaces with objects that can be created multiple times, and are relatively easy to test, but is quite complex to implement.

Complicated language, and some things are hard to use correctly.
Namespaces are neat! Templates occasionally useful! Has lambdas!

### Rust

A powerful but complicated language.
Compile times are quite slow.
Metaprogramming allows some magic like serialization/deserialization implemented from struct definitions.

As I understand it, limited embedded support at the time of writing.

