---
title: Folder structure
date: 2025-06-13
---

Partly formed thoughts on folder structures in software projects.

Requirements:

- It should be easy to drill down into a program. Entrypoints should be obvious.
- The project architecture – the layers and modules - should be clear from the folder structure.
- It should be easy to access related code when working within a module.
- The system should be clear and unambiguous to make it easier to find code based on what it does.
- It should be easy to determine the intended public interface of a module.
- Important items should be more discoverable than less important items.

Avoid excessive nesting (extra typing required, little value). The higher things are up in the hierarchy, the more discoverable they are. Frequently accessed things should be convenient.

Folders are perhaps best matching namespacing, since in namespaces and folders names can’t be repeated.

Software normally is composed of layers. This can be hard to understand based on a folder structure, but maybe folders can help?

Modules have complicated internals and small interfaces. The interface will be seen more often than the implementation. Interfaces should be more visible than internals?

Do components need to be in folders? Or is a single file enough?

Tests, examples etc probably should be in subfolders so as not to pollute the main area? But tests are typically maintained along with the code?

It might be helpful to group objects of different types (eg widgets, frames, windows, dialogs?).

If the project is an app, it can be hard to find the entrypoint. Maybe that should be clearly identified by having it at the top level?

Sometimes folders are used to group files by area. It is possible to achieve the same effect by using a common prefix in the filename, which avoids hiding the files. I am unsure which is better.

