---
title: War stories
date: 2025-06-13
---

Some notes on debugging experiences that were interesting.

## Temperature dependent behaviour

A machine in a hot packhouse would periodically show an E-Stop as active in the UI, but continue operating. This was mysterious, but ruled out hardware since it would have prevented the machine from operating.
Some debugging later (including photos of the message log on the device) revealed we were incorrectly stripping the escape sequences from messages sent back over the USB port. The code in question had been written for C# and later ported to C++, and the person doing the porting had made the classic mistake of using an iterator after deleting an element from the underlying data structure.
The reason it turned up in this one packhouse was that an earlier field in the once a second status message was the "temperature" field (in degrees celcius) and on hot days it would happen to match the escape character, shifting the E-Stop field one byte over into an adjacent empty byte!

## Compiler dependent argument evaluation

On the same machine, a colleague had written some code like this: `handleMessage(pop32(msg), pop32(msg))`.
The function `pop32(msg)` would take the message, return an integer, incrementing the read pointer in the message at the same time.
Only it turns out that this is [unspecified in C](https://stackoverflow.com/a/2934909/19305332), so on one compiler it would evaluate left-to-right as intended, and another it would evaluate backwards, switching the arguments!
This was particularly annoying as our unit tests ran locally on the "good" compiler...

