---
title: Programming best practices
date: 2025-06-13
---

Some notes on best practices.

Where possible, try to find external references supporting these practices.

## Consistency

*Opinion*

Consistency helps readability more than inconsistent perfection. This applies to both code style (eg naming conventions) and approach (patterns used).

An automated code formatting tool is valuable, because it avoids needing to think about or discuss code formatting. It also better supports automated refactoring.

Requiring consistency blocks improvements to the way of doing things. Long term, this means that a product will be written in an obsolete language using obsolete patterns. Some form of evolution must be provided for.

## Modules

Code should be arranged in modules of related functionality with clearly defined interfaces. This creates defined shearing layers and collects related functionality to simplify discovery.

The goal of modules is to minimize coupling between different modules to allow them to evolve independently and be reused, while allowing the modules to be cohesive.

See [Coupling (computer programming) - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coupling_(computer_programming)).

## Namespaces

*Opinion*

Namespaces help group related functionality into cohesive modules. They also help avoid name collisions.

Namespaces also provide hints as to the source of a variable or function. This is not an important benefit, because it is already easy to find automatically.

Enforcing unique names across a codebase makes automated refactoring easier. However, scope aware tooling avoids the need for this.

Namespaces make names longer, which hurts readability. Nested namespaces should be avoided for this reason. Namespaces are not required for local variables, only for variables exposed outside of the module.

In C, this means that functions scoped outside a single file should be named with a module prefix, eg `util_helloWorld`, independent of if they are part of the public interface or not. C lacks a fine grained `import` mechanism, so headers should be restricted in scope to a single module to further reduce the risk of name collisions.

## Scoping

*Opinion*

Things should have the least possible scope. This reduces the chance of name collisions, keeps metadata closer to hand (for example type information) and makes maintenance easier (reduces the chance of missing a use because it was far away).

For example, variables should be declared on first use and public interfaces should be kept small.

In a similar fashion, documentation should live close to what it describes. This must be balanced with making the documentation easy to find.

Collecting all variables at the top of a file is an antipattern. The only advantage is that reuse of variables is easier (for example for an error checking `ok` variable).

Code should be arranged in modules with clearly defined interfaces.

In C, this means that non-public file level variables and functions should always be static, and that variables should be declared on first use. Macros should be defined before they are used and undefined afterwards.

## Naming conventions

There are several options here: ALL\_CAPS, PascalCase, camelCase, snake\_case, kebab-case, Combined\_Case. Hungarian notation (metadata in variable names) can also be used. Information may be encoded in the naming style, like Go using PascalCase to denote public functions instead of a dedicated keyword.

[An Eye Tracking Study on camelCase and under\_score Identifier Styles](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5521745) seem to suggest that people are fastest with what they are used to, rather than there being an ideal option. As such it is best to stick with whatever style is mainly used in the language. 

Hungarian notation should be avoided when it duplicates information, increasing the risk of inconsistency. It may provide value for languages with weak type systems, or requirements that cannot be encoded in the type system. See also [Hungarian notation - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hungarian_notation#Disadvantages).

## Types

Languages provide a type system both to make things easier for the compiler, and so that we can specify interactions more precisely. Use it where possible. For example, prefer enum classes in C++ over plain enums. This can prevent bugs caused by using a value meant to be one type for another (think units/bins/destinations; all are integers and are often similar, but should not be confused). It also can enable introspection in languages supporting that.

For similar reasons, avoid using formatted strings to pass information. If a program accepts a string, convert it to a typed object as soon as possible.

See also [Refactoring to an Adaptive Model](https://www.martinfowler.com/articles/refactoring-adaptive-model.html#RemovePrimitiveObsession), [Stringly Typed](https://wiki.c2.com/?StringlyTyped) and [Primitive Obsession](https://wiki.c2.com/?PrimitiveObsession).

## Include units in variable names

If a unit is intended to include a physical quantity and it isn’t possible to encode it in the type, ensure it is encoded in the variable name. For example: `rebootDelayMs`, `distToSensorMm`. This makes it easier when reading the code later, especially when working through calculations involving several variables of different units.

See also [M0AGX / LB9MG - Best practices in firmware](https://m0agx.eu/best-practices-in-firmware.html).

