---
title: Embedded software features
date: 2025-06-13
---

A collection of notes about different “nice to have” features in an embedded platform, with links where relevant. 

## Logging

It’s useful to be able exfiltrate data from microcontroller code. Here, low overhead and data volume is important. On one system this was accomplished using either the “log to CSV” functionality or a dedicated message + small helper application where timestamped data was collected into buffers and sent once the buffer was full. This could handle quite large amounts of data – enough for streaming sensor data, and almost enough for 20-30kHZ sampling of several channels of data. On a system with CAN we struggled with this due to the low performance of the bus, but a similar option was available. One further option for exfiltration is to use an internal buffer that is monitored via the debug probe. This is used by Segger for high performance logging, and looks excellent for this purpose. Note that watchpoints and other “monitoring” debugging techniques can fill a similar niche.

A more traditional logging method is to use a serial console. This is very much a “poor man’s” approach – it is slow (printf on target, slow communication protocol) and flash heavy (need to store strings in flash, plus overhead for formatting). The only benefit is that it is trivial to set up.

One use case for logging is debugging crashes. On one system we had a sophisticated fault handler that would save a stack trace and register states to memory, which was then sent on the next boot. One issue with this is that you had to work out what version of the software was running when it crashed. [Here is a good reference](https://embeddedartistry.com/blog/2021/01/11/hard-fault-debugging/) with some details on this technique.

Another system had a status message sent every second. This contained some fields useful for debugging – typically state machine information and error counters. It was possible to log this information on the host, particularly the state machine information.

To keep things minimal on the MCU, it is possible to implement a binary mechanism and do the message assembly for viewing on a computer. This is the approach [Trice](https://github.com/rokath/trice) takes. It uses a code generator to generate a file with the format strings and argument descriptions. Having a host side log processing tool also opens up other options, eg filtering by source subsystem.

Accurate timestamps are useful when investigating logs. A normal mechanism is to have a dedicated high precision timer.

It would be neat to have high performance, persistent logging so that crashes could return both the stack trace and the messages before the crash. This would be possible if the logs were kept as a circular buffer in memory?

For one system, the default error handling strategy for programming errors was to send a string to the UI. This was a convenient mechanism – perhaps too convenient since it was occasionally used for customer facing strings with no translation!

Some users will be worried if the system displays errors. Try to only display errors if they are legitimate and actionable. Consider using counters for errors that could occur often, or are unlikely to cause immediate issues.

Using counters for debugging is discussed in [M0AGX / LB9MG - Best practices in firmware](https://m0agx.eu/best-practices-in-firmware.html).

## Command line interface

This is often used for production testing of the board. An alternative is to provide an application that speaks the messaging protocol. The upside of a CLI interface is that adding debugging printouts is trivial, whereas the barrier is higher if it needs to go through a messaging protocol (especially if the platform uses a “generic” protocol). The downside is that the serial interface is normally pretty clunky and/or heavyweight. It also introduces a second interface to test and maintain. 

## Watchdog

How important this is varies significantly, I have worked on systems without watchdogs without any reported issues.

With another system we have a hardware and a software watchdog. I’m unsure how that works, and I haven’t seen it add any value. On the other hand it is often written about, so it must be a useful technique in situations where responsiveness is important. It will reset the chip if it is looping in a random section of memory due to another issue. One recommendation I’ve seen is to kick the watchdog in the idle task. Another option is to have per task watchdogs to ensure that they are meeting deadlines.

Watchdogs sometimes need to be disabled when writing to flash, because in single bank designs it can’t be read (and executed from!) while the write is ongoing.

See also [this article](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/firmware-watchdog-best-practices).

## Panic

One system didn’t have this, the firmware tried to carry on for even serious problems. But in a highly dynamic system it is quite useful to be able to bail and say “this is a fatal error” and expect it to be logged on the host. A backtrace and some extra data here is useful but not essential. Some care is required to avoid getting into a reboot loop, especially in the bootloader before the communication interfaces are up!

It’s often hard to tell how fatal an error really is. If it is very important, it might be better to just retry in the application code rather than resetting. If it isn’t important, then we should just log and carry on. It is most useful for “assert” style statements – things that indicate a programmer mistake.

On a panic, it is useful to have some basic information about the register contents, fault type and location, stack trace, and recent events/logs. See [M0AGX / LB9MG - Preserving debugging breadcrumbs across reboots in Cortex-M](https://m0agx.eu/preserving-debugging-breadcrumbs-across-reboots-in-cortex-m.html) for a discussion.

## Hardware reservation

This is a technique where an address is “reserved” and an attempt to reuse it will generate a panic. It is useful to identify when two parts of the code try to use the same peripheral. Discipline is required to add the reservations. It is a nice safeguard; it would be even better if trying to use the same component in two places generated a compile time error. Alternatively, maybe all the hardware configuration should be injected and then it might be obvious!

On a system that didn’t have this working out which peripheral was free required some careful code reading. Normally this was unimportant, but figuring out which timers were free was sometimes a pain.

## Memory protection

Fancier ARM MCUs provide an MPU. This can be configured to add some safety to threads – both avoiding one thread writing data owned by the other thread by an accidental cross-thread call, and by adding hardware stack overflow protection. Definitely worth looking into.

Some references for this:

https://community.arm.com/arm-community-blogs/b/tools-software-ides-blog/posts/process-isolation-with-fusa-rts

https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/using-psp-msp-limit-registers-for-stack-overflow

## Restart reason

This is only useful if it is logged... and even then, only mildly useful.

One use is to wipe any in-memory structures on powerup, but retain them on reset; handy for persistent data like logs or passing information to and from bootloaders.

If possible, make restarts externally visible to make it easier to identify restart loops or restarts due to external issues (eg a motor starting causing a brown out).

On a related note, consider counting uptime. This is useful to check that the last restart was when expected.

See also [M0AGX / LB9MG - Best practices in firmware](https://m0agx.eu/best-practices-in-firmware.html).

## MTB/ETB

Another crash logging option – an ARM feature that writes to RAM on a branch. This can then be retrieved and returned with the backtrace/registers on crash.
 
See [interrupt's article on this](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/instruction-tracing-mtb-m33) for details.

## Debugger detection

This can be fruitfully used to avoid bootloading when a debugger is attached. Another use case is avoiding resetting in fault handlers if there is a debugger attached, and instead halting and waiting for the developer to inspect the system.

## Release versioning

The firmware should be able to self-report what version it is. It is also helpful if this can be retrieved by inspection of the firmware release file – either through a custom header or through careful placement of the data (“stick it at the end of the binary with a linker script” approach). At a minimum, one unique ID is helpful so you can verify that your modified firmware is the one running. This information should be generated and included as part of the build process.

Options include a VCS revision, some kind of hash of the code, a build timestamp, a CI ID, or the developer’s name and machine hostname. A VCS revision needs care – what if the source is “dirty”, or what if the VCS system used changes in the future? But it can provide a useful unique ID for developers. A GNU Build ID can provide a unique identifier for a build, since it is effectively a hash of the contents. But it needs to be referenced back to a database of builds and associated metadata. A CI ID is irrelevant for local builds and so is of minimal utility.

One problem with a build timestamp is that you may end up re-writing the flash even if the firmware didn’t change. It’s also annoying if you are looking for differences in two different builds that should be the same – for example if you rename some constants. This can be worked around, for instance by calculating the CRC of a firmware image but avoiding the version information block. To me this seems a bit like magic that should be avoided, but it may be relevant if firmware updates are “expensive”.

Some opinions on this subject are [here](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/release-versioning). It also talks about migrating on-disk formats, which (in my opinion) should be separately versioned to fully support upgrades and (potentially) downgrades.

Downgrades are mentioned as a potential pain point. This is only problematic if the bootload system changes in some incompatible way or there is on disk data to care about. Making it “impossible” to change the on disk format is an option.

## Data storage

For standalone devices it can be helpful to have data storage! Normally this is done in an ad hoc or unsafe fashion. Data will be read by different versions, so backwards and forwards compatibility is a concern. If the data is read on startup, special care needs to be taken to make the reading code robust – especially if lengths are stored in the data.

TODO: Fill this in more? I don’t have any good thoughts here, except to not do it the way it is done in the projects I’ve worked on...

Storing data in flash is worth considering. You have plenty of spare flash, right?

Some notes on this are [M0AGX / LB9MG - Best practices in firmware](https://m0agx.eu/best-practices-in-firmware.html), describing a versioning magic + CRC based approach. 

## Task and interrupt priority register

Because tasks and interrupt priorities are only relevant when comparing them, it is worth keeping this information in a central registry. To help with determinism it can be nice to have unique priorities for every task – then the RTOS will consistently choose which task to run if both are available at the same time.

## Development environment setup

The easiest option here is a script, but when the script is changed it may have to deal with an unpredictable base system. A metapackage is not a bad option as it integrates well with the Linux ecosystem. Metapackages are generally bad at removing things, but “orphan” detection can help with that. Docker also works, but it is a lot of overhead and awkwardness just for way to define the build environment. Another option is a provisioning system like Chef or Puppet.

Having an automated strategy for this is also useful for maintaining a build server for a CI system.

## Simple build

A “single command build” is ideal here. Consider a makefile, shell script, or something to enshrine the typical operations, especially if it involves several steps. This is useful for developers and CI, and also provides a form of documentation.

This idea also includes linter passes, running tests, and deployment.

See also [Building a CLI for Firmware Projects using Invoke | Interrupt (memfault.com)](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/building-a-cli-for-firmware-projects#a-project-cli).

## Build time checks

Turning on warnings and static analyzers (`-fanalyzer`), at least for CI builds.

Have a plan for debugging crashes afterwards. At a minimum, save the symbol map somewhere!

For tracking alloc/free see also `__attribute__((malloc))`. It can be customized to work with other allocation types.

See also [M0AGX / LB9MG - Best practices in firmware](https://m0agx.eu/best-practices-in-firmware.html).

## Testing

Testing is another side of the equation. At a minimum, some on-device tests for firmware upgrade and downgrade are smart. An easy framework for adding unit tests (and fuzzing!) that runs on the host is useful. A “module test” framework for end-to-end tests on a device is useful for verifying hardware drivers. Finally, a full system test setup with all the boards, fake (or even better real!) hardware can be useful for exploratory testing.

To make unit testing feasible it is necessary to carefully split out the hardware dependent code. Code that relies on OS services is also to be treated with care; pure logic should be confined in separate files and functions. For C code, the simplest option is building binaries with mock implementations of relevant functions to satisfy the linker.

Tests should generally run on every commit. The exception might be the firmware upgrade tests, but those are well worth testing regularly anyway to catch sporadic issues.

## Telemetry and monitoring

I have never used this, but it seems useful. The goal is to report metrics – typically simple integers, generally counters – so that development can be data-driven. This could be used to identify little used features that could be removed, heavily used features worth further development, and an increase in panics with a new firmware release. All of this assumes that the systems have effective reporting mechanisms.

Some links discussing approaches: 

https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/device-heartbeat-metrics 

https://research.swtch.com/telemetry 

## Self tests

Another one I’ve never used. I am told it is useful to flush out sporadic errors due to flaky hardware, but also so that the rest of the code could assume that the hardware it was talking to was OK, reducing the chance of confusing cascading errors.

The system described had a POST, and then another set of tests that ran every 20 minutes. Having tests that run regularly is a little complicated because they must avoid stepping on the toes of all the other code. However, a POST sounds like it could be worth implementing.

See also [M0AGX / LB9MG - Best practices in firmware](https://m0agx.eu/best-practices-in-firmware.html).

## Board identification

Boards should be self-identifying. There are two parts to this: 

- PCB ID (PCB without components). Should have a part number silkscreened on the board. 
- PCBA ID (PCB + components; printed circuit board assembly). Must be printed on a sticker on the assembled board. 

The solutions vary. Some options:

- Use some kind of EEPROM (SPI/I2C/1-wire/MCU internal/flash sector) that is programmed in the factory. This is a good opportunity to add serial number/MAC address/test results as well.
- Encode the ID in hardware on the board, which can be mapped to a part number and revision. For example, use GPIO pins with traces (PCB ID) and 0 ohm resistors (PCBA ID). Another option is to use shift registers to reduce the number of GPIO pins required. Since the board ID is only read on boot, it may be possible to reuse the GPIO pins.
- Use different firmware builds for every possible PCB/PCBA ID. If the factory firmware flashed on the board has the right ID and all updates must have a matching ID, it will be “carried forwards”. Might be best in a hybrid form with the PCB ID being tied to the firmware but the PCBA ID being external. It would be wise to automatically test that the ID is never accidentally changed in the software!

The board test firmware should verify any hardware board IDs in the factory to prevent a board identifying itself wrongly if it is damaged.

Add-on boards should also be self identifying. This can be achieved using similar strategies.

See also https://embeddedartistry.com/fieldatlas/versioning-pcbs/.

## Heartbeat signal

Some kind of regular heartbeat – like an LED or a message on a bus – can be useful to verify that a board is still running. For a heartbeat message, consider adding some basic status information (eg uptime).

See also [M0AGX / LB9MG - Best practices in firmware](https://m0agx.eu/best-practices-in-firmware.html).

## Firmware override

Being able to override deployed firmware is useful for testing, as it can be significantly faster than rebuilding the entire application. For example, the bootloading code may check for firmware in a special folder before loading the version that came with the capplication.

This functionality can cause issues, for example if test firmware is accidentally left on a customer's machine.
To reduce risk the firmware should be tied to a specific application version or automatically deleted when the application is updated. There should also be a clear indication in the UI and logs that the built in firmware is being overridden.

