---
title: Numbering systems
date: 2025-09-27
---

It seems tempting to add meaning to identifier schemes. However, if the ID must remain the same, the meaning will gradually stop matching reality.
Instead, use a meaningless ID and provide a lookup system to convert the IDs to something meaningful. That way the meaning can be updated as necessary, while the entity retains a fixed ID.

Meaningless ID options:
- Incrementing integers. Useful when there is a single entity responsible for allocation. Short.
- UUIDs. Useful for entities in software. Awkwardly long.
- OID style hierarchical IDs. A variant on incrementing integers that allows multiple entities to allocate numbers.

In a prior job, the mechanical department originally included a categories and subcategories in the part numbering scheme.
However, after a series of software migrations and merges, there were 4+ distinct numbering systems. This made the categorisation effectively useless. An incrementing integer ID combined with a lookup system would have been equally useful and the part number would have been shorter (useful since they were sometimes communicated over the phone).

House numbers are often allocated sequentially, with even numbers on one side of the street and odd numbers on the other. This never works out quite as tidily as it should, for example houses are added later and sub identifier schemes are necessary to preserve the order (eg 37c being the third house in the 37 slot).
In the era of online maps, it seems better to just allocate the house an ID based on when it was built.

A software tool used string based property names. Unfortunately, the name both is meaningful and impossible to change, due to being in thousands of databases. The result is confusing names without much structure. The properties tend to include project or product names which inevitably become out of date (product or project is renamed, or the property is reused for other products). Using a UUID and a mapping to a human readable name would have been a better approach, then the names can be updated later as the use evolves.

