---
title: Why are New Zealand railways uneconomic?
date: 2025-10-10
---

New Zealand railways seem to be uneconomic, with the exception of the two commuter rail networks in Wellington and Auckland.
This is hard to understand as Norway - another country of ~5 million with rather challenging terrain - has a fairly healthy rail network.

New Zealand has a few major cities with very few trains:

- Auckland, population ~1.5 million.
- Wellington, population ~400 thousand, 640km by road from Auckland. 3 trains per week.
- Christchurch, population ~400 thousand, 440km by road from Wellington (plus a 22km Cook Strait). 1 train per day.

Norway has a few more cities near the capital, with quite a few more trains:

- Oslo, population ~1.5 million.
- Bergen, population ~450 thousand, ~450km by road from Oslo. 4-6 trains per day from Oslo.
- Trondheim, population ~200 thousand, ~500km by road from Oslo. 7 trains per day from Oslo?
- Stavanger, population ~150 thousand, ~450km by road from Oslo. 5 trains per day?

Olso-Bergen and Auckland-Wellington seem like the most similar routes, so let's try to compare them.

- Oslo to Bergen by car is ~7 hours, by train ~6.5 hours. Flights cost ~650NOK. Train tickets are 400-600NOK if purchased ahead of time.
- Auckland to Wellington by car is ~7.5 hours, by train 10h 40 minutes. Flights cost ~90NZD (roughly 550NOK). Train tickets are $249 or ~1450NOK.

So it seems like flying might be more competitive on costs and time grounds. Additionally, the New Zealand train route is just slow.

The Auckland to Wellington route passes through Hamilton (~190 thousand) and Palmerston North (~90 thousand), which should increase ridership. Oslo to Bergen goes through Drammen (~100 thousand).

From reading online, it also seems like the Norwegian rail system is heavily subsidized, which would explain the ticket price difference. Maybe that is why there are significantly more trains?

